---
title: "ANN: cabal-fmt"
author: Oleg Grenrus
---

As [`Cabal-3.0.0.0`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/Cabal-3.0.0.0)
is now released, I uploaded the [`cabal-fmt`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cabal-fmt)
tool to Hackage. I have been using `cabal-fmt` for over a half year
now for my own Haskell projects, and have been happy with this
minimal, yet useful tool. `cabal-fmt` formats `.cabal` file
preserving the field ordering and comments.

`cabal-fmt` is based on
[`Distribution.Fields`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/Cabal-3.0.0.0/docs/Distribution-Fields.html)
functionality. `cabal-fmt` is a thin addition on top.
Same `Distribution.Fields` (and related [`Distribution.FieldsGrammar`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/Cabal-3.0.0.0/docs/Distribution-FieldGrammar.html))
is also used in [`haskell-ci`](https://github.com/haskell-ci/haskell-ci)
to parse and print `.cabal`-like files. I also use it in other tools
to implement configuration files.
In my opinion the
lexical structure of `.cabal` files is more flexible and human-writing-friendly
than YAML or JSON. YMMV. For example the header for this post is written as

```yaml
title: "ANN: cabal-fmt"
author: Oleg Grenrus
```

with quotes needed to disambiguate YAML. That's silly :) Cabal-like syntax
would be

```cabal
title: ANN: cabal-fmt
author: Oleg Grenrus
```

However, enough bashing YAML.

`cabal-fmt` is opinionated tool, it does format few fields
to my liking. Let us see how.

<div id="toc"></div>

build-depends
-------------

`build-depends` modules are formatted comma first (with `cabal-version: 2.2` also with a leading comma),
tabulated, sorted, and `^>=` preferred when it can be used.
For example:

```cabal
build-depends:
  , base        ^>=4.11.1.0 || ^>=4.12.0.0
  , bytestring  ^>=0.10.8.2
  , Cabal       ^>=3.0.0.0
  , containers  ^>=0.5.11.0 || ^>=0.6.0.1
  , filepath    ^>=1.4.2
  , mtl         ^>=2.2.2
  , parsec      ^>=3.1.13.0
  , pretty      ^>=1.1.3.6
```

or (for older `cabal-version`):

```cabal
build-depends:
    base     >=4.3     && <4.14
  , deepseq  >=1.3.0.0 && <1.5
  , time     >=1.2.0.3 && <1.10
```

Single `build-depends` are formatted as a single line, like

```cabal
build-depends: random >=1.0 && <1.2
```

nub & sort
----------

`exposed-modules`, `other-modules`, `default-extensions` and `other-extensions`
are sorted and duplicates removed. For example.

```cabal
exposed-modules:
  CabalFmt
  CabalFmt.Comments
  CabalFmt.Error
  CabalFmt.Fields
  CabalFmt.Fields.BuildDepends
  CabalFmt.Fields.Extensions
  CabalFmt.Fields.Modules
  CabalFmt.Fields.TestedWith
  CabalFmt.Monad
  CabalFmt.Options
  CabalFmt.Parser
  CabalFmt.Refactoring
```

Sometimes, you'll prefer some module to be the first, for `cabal repl`.
In that case I would use two `exposed-modules` fields.


tested-with
-----------

`tested-with` is one more field where I don't like the default formatting either.
This field drives the job selection in [`haskell-ci`](https://github.com/haskell-ci/haskell-ci).
`cabal-fmt` combines version ranges for compilers, and prints
`GHC` and `GHCJS` in upper case.

```cabal
tested-with:
  GHC ==8.8.1 || ==8.6.5 || ==8.4.4 || ==8.2.2 || ==8.0.2 || ==7.10.3
  GHCJS ==8.4
```

The line generated is long, especially for packages supporting
a lot of GHC versions. Something I don't have a clear preference yet how to handle.

Extra: expand exposed-modules and other-modules
------------------------------------------------

The recent addition is an ability to (re)write field contents, while formatting.
There's an old, ongoing discussion of allowing wildcard specification
of `exposed-modules` in `.cabal` format. I'm against that change.
Instead, rather `cabal-fmt` (or an imaginary IDE), would regenerate
parts of `.cabal` file given some commands.

`cabal-fmt: expand <directory>` is a one (the only at the moment) such command.

`cabal-fmt` will look into *directory* for files, turn filenames into module names
and append to the contents of `exposed-modules`.
As the field is then nubbed and sorted, expanding is idempotent.
For example `cabal-fmt` itself has:

```cabal
-- cabal-fmt: expand src
--
exposed-modules:
  CabalFmt
  ...
```

The functionality is simple. There is no removal of `other-modules`
or `main-is`. I think that using different directory for these is good
enough workaround, and may make things clearer: directory for public
modules and a directory for private ones.

Conclusion
----------

And that's all that `cabal-fmt` does. Formatting
of other fields comes directly from `Cabal`.
I have few ideas, what else can be done, e.g.

- `cabal-fmt: expand` for `extra-source-files`
- formatting of `reexported-modules`
- sorting of fields, e.g. putting `type` and `default-language` to the top of
  the component stanzas.

But these don't bother me enough yet, so they are not there.

The implicit goal of a project is to iterate independently of `cabal-install`,
Find out what could be useful, and how it can be done, and later merge into
`cabal-install`'s `cabal format` functionality. Yet then providing enough
configuration knobs to not be so opinionated.
