---
title: "ANN: cabal-fmt-0.1.4 - --no-cabal-fmt and fragments"
author: Oleg Grenrus
tags: packages
---

I spent this Sunday writing two small patches to [`cabal-fmt`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cabal-fmt).

--no-cabal-file flag
--------------------

`cabal-fmt` reasonably assumes that the file it is formatting is a cabal package
definition file. So it parses it as such. That is needed to correctly
pretty print the fields, as some syntax, for example leading comma
requires somewhat recent `cabal-version: 2.2`
(see [Package Description Format Specification History](https://cabal.readthedocs.io/en/3.4/file-format-changelog.html) for details).

However, there are other files using the same markup format,
for example `cabal.project` files or `cabal.haskell-ci` configuration files used by
[haskell-ci](https://github.com/haskell-ci/haskell-ci) tool.
Wouldn't it be nice if `cabal-fmt` could format these as well.
In `cabal-fmt-0.1.4` you can pass `-n` or `--no-cabal-fmt` flag,
to prevent `cabal-fmt` from parsing these files as cabal package file.

The downside is that the latest known cabal specification will be used.
That shouldn't break `cabal.haskell-ci` files, but it might break
`cabal.project` files if you are not careful. (Their parsing code is somewhat antique).

An example of reformatting the `cabal.project` of this blog:

```diff
--- a/cabal.project
+++ b/cabal.project
@@ -1,9 +1,7 @@
 index-state:   2020-05-10T17:53:22Z
 with-compiler: ghc-8.6.5
-
 packages:
-    "."
-    pkg/gists-runnable.cabal
+  "."
+  pkg/gists-runnable.cabal
 
-constraints:
-  hakyll +previewServer
+constraints:   hakyll +previewServer
```

So satisfying.

Fragments
---------

Another addition are *fragments*. They are best illustrated by an example.
Imagine you have a multi-package project, and you use `haskell-ci`
to generate your `.travis.yml`.
Each `.cabal` package file must have the same

```cabal
...

tested-with: GHC ==8.4.4 || ==8.6.5 || ==8.8.3 || ==8.10.1

library
  ...
```

Then you find out that GHC 8.8.4 and GHC-8.10.2 were recently released,
and you want to update your CI configuration.
Editing multiple files, with the same change. Busy work.

With `cabal-fmt-0.1.4` you can create a fragment file, lets call it
`tested-with.fragment`:

```cabal
tested-with: GHC ==8.4.4 || ==8.6.5 || ==8.8.4 || ==8.10.2
```

And then edit your package files with a *cabal-fmt pragma* (
the fragment is probably in the root directory of project,
but `.cabal` files are inside a directory per package):

```diff
 ...

+-- cabal-fmt: fragment ../tested-with.fragment
 tested-with: GHC ==8.4.4 || ==8.6.5 || ==8.8.3 || ==8.10.1

 library
  ...
```

Then when you next time run

```bash
cabal-fmt --inplace */*.cabal
```

you'll see the diff

```diff
 ...

 -- cabal-fmt: fragment ../tested-with.fragment
-tested-with: GHC ==8.4.4 || ==8.6.5 || ==8.8.3 || ==8.10.1
+tested-with: GHC ==8.4.4 || ==8.6.5 || ==8.8.4 || ==8.10.2


 library
  ...
```

for all libraries. *Handy*!

Some design comments:

- Fragment is only a single field or a single section (e.g. [common stanzas](https://cabal.readthedocs.io/en/3.4/cabal-package.html#common-stanzas)).
  Never multiple single fields. (Easier to implement, least surprising behavior: pragma is attached to a single field or section).
- Field name or section header in the `.cabal` file and the fragment have to match. (To avoid mistakes).
- Substitution is not recursive. (Guaranteed termination).
- Other pragmas in fragments are not executed. Neither are comments in fragments preserved. (Not sure whether that would be valuable).

Finally, you can use `cabal-fmt --no-cabal-fmt` to format fragment files too,
even they are reformatted when spliced.

Conclusion
----------

`cabal-fmt-0.1.4` is a small release.
I made `--no-cabal-file` to scratch my itch,
and fragments partly to highlight that not every feature can exist
in `Cabal`, but is very fine for preprocessors.
I do think that fragments could be very useful in bigger projects.
Let me know!
